README.md, before:

# SqlClient - Groovy SQL Client

SqlClient is a database client designed primarily for batch SQL submission.
It is written in Groovy, which compiles to Java, and is compatible with 
vendor-provided Java database drivers.  In particular it works with the 
Denodo JDBC virtual database driver.  It has also been tested with the 
Snowflake JDBC driver and should work with other Java-based database drivers.

It takes input from any one of standard input, command line, or file.
SQL statements normally must be terminated with a semicolon although
for command-line input the semicolon is optional.  In addition to standard
input SqlClient provides an interactive mode with command line editing and 
history leveraging the jline3 library.

Output formats supported are:

    text
    csv
    html
    xml
    json

SqlClient is careful to avoid overwriting any existing files and will abort
in the event of a conflict unless the _overwrite_ option is in effect.

## Command Line Options

**sqlclient [options]**

    -c,--config <arg>           specify database configuration file
    -d,--database <arg>         specify database name
    -f,--filein <arg>           specify input filename
    -F,--format <arg>           specify format
    -h,--help                   usage information
    -i,--interactive            run in interactive mode
    -n,--node <arg>             specify database node
    -o,--fileout <arg>          specify output filename
    -O,--overwrite              overwrite output file
    -p,--password <arg>         specify database password
    -s,--scheme <arg>           specify database scheme
    -S,--sql <arg>              specify SQL statement
    -t,--timestamps             timestamp output
    -T,--testconnect <arg>      run connection test
    -u,--user <arg>             specify database username
    -v,--verbose <arg>          specify verbose level
    -w,--width <arg>            limit text column width

## Usage

SqlClient reads SQL, submits it to a connected database, and formats the results
in one of the output formats selected.  

The SQL input can come from a disk file, the command line through the --sql option, 
or from standard input (keyboard or pipe).

In addition to standard input, SqlClient also supports an interactive line editing 
mode with retained history.  History is kept in `$HOME/.sqlclient_history`.

SqlClient also supports a control record capability.  Control records allow 
directives to be processed during the SQL processing.  

Directives supported are:

    .format <type>
    .output <filename>
    .overwrite
    .width <max text column width>

SqlClient supports various verbose levels as well as a timestamp option
for runtime feedback.

## Verbose levels

    level 0 - no messages (except data of course) 
    level 1 - basic messages (open/close)
    level 2 - enhanced messages (adds open/close success, query)
    level 3 - debug messages (adds input trace, text format field adjustments)
    level 4 - debug messages (adds system.properties display)

## Config file format

Config files are optional files containing all the database connection parameters.
They are written in TOML format and support the following parameters:

    dbUser      - the database username
    dbPassword  - the database password
    dbScheme    - the JDBC scheme (tested with "vdb" for Denodo and "snowflake" for Snowflake)
    dbHost      - the TCP network address (hostname:port)
    dbName      - the database name
    dbClass     - the database driver class name (optional, defaults based on dbScheme setting) 
                    (tested with com.denodo.vdp.jdbc.Driver and com.snowflake.client.jdbc.SnowflakeDriver) 

## Test Connection Capability

Additionally, SqlClient has a connection testing capability. With the --testconnect <arg> 
option SqlClient will open a database connection, submit a simple query, read the results,
discard the results, and close the connection a requested number of times, pausing between
each connection for a requested interval. The --testconnect argument is of the form 'N@M' 
where N represents the number of connection iterations and M represents the wait interval 
between connections measured in milliseconds. If the interval is not specified it defaults
to 1000 (1 second).  This feature is sometimes useful in diagnosing/investigating database 
connectivity issues.

## Examples

**File itemdb.config**

    dbUser = "appuser"
    dbPassword = "appword"
    dbScheme = "vdb"
    dbHost = "dbhost.mydomain.com:9999"
    dbName = "itemdb"
    dbClass = "com.denodo.vdp.jdbc.Driver"

Specifying the dbClass in the config file is optional.  SqlClient uses a default dbClass based on the vdb option
but if a dbClass is provided then it will override the default.

**File item-extract.sql:**

    .format json
    .output ../extract/items.json
    .overwrite
    SELECT * FROM ITEM;

**Executing item-extract.sql**

`sqlclient --config=itemdb.config --filein=item-extract.sql`

**Executing a SQL statement**

`sqlclient --config=itemdb.config --sql "SELECT * FROM ITEM"`

`echo "SELECT * FROM ITEM" | sqlclient --config=itemdb.config`

Either of these examples will run the query and send the output to the screen.

**File txn_audit.sql**

    select
      100                           -- unnamed integer field
    , 200 as "named field 1"        -- field name longer than field width
    , audit_dt as "audit date"      -- date/time field with named field with space
    , audit_reason                  -- standard varchar field
    , item_id                       -- short varchar field (6)
    , price                         -- double
    
    from
        txn_audit
    join
        txn
    on
        txn.txn_id = txn_audit.txn_id
    ;

Executing txn_audit.sql to produce txn_audit.xml in XML format (shown using short option and without --config option)

`sqlclient -s vdb -n dbhost.mydomain.com:9999 -d itemdb -u appuser -p appword -f txn_audit.sql -o txn_audit.xml -F xml`

### Sample executions

Sample text execution

    $ sqlclient --config=itemdb.config --sql "SELECT ITEM_ID, DESCRIPTION FROM ITEM LIMIT 3"
    
    item_id     description
    ----------- ------------------------------
         986461 <!Magnotta> - Bel Paese White
         316882 Beer - Fruli,IPA
         887875 Marlbourough Sauv Blanc!

Sample CSV execution (note quoting)

    $ sqlclient --config=itemdb.config --sql "SELECT ITEM_ID, DESCRIPTION FROM ITEM LIMIT 3" --format csv

    item_id,description
    986461,<!Magnotta> - Bel Paese White
    316882,"Beer - Fruli,IPA"
    887875,Marlbourough Sauv Blanc!

Sample HTML execution

    $ sqlclient --config=itemdb.config --sql "SELECT ITEM_ID, DESCRIPTION FROM ITEM LIMIT 3" --format html

    <table>
      <thead>
        <tr>
          <th>item_id</th>
          <th>description</th>
        </tr>
      </thead>
      <tbody>
        <tr>
          <td>986461</td>
          <td>&lt;!Magnotta&gt; - Bel Paese White</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
          <td>316882</td>
          <td>Beer - Fruli,IPA</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
          <td>887875</td>
          <td>Marlbourough Sauv Blanc!</td>
        </tr>
      </tbody>
    </table>

Sample XML execution

    $ sqlclient --config=itemdb.config --sql "SELECT ITEM_ID, DESCRIPTION FROM ITEM LIMIT 3" --format xml

    <rows>
      <rowResult><!-- row: 1 -->
        <item_id>986461</item_id>
        <description>&lt;!Magnotta&gt; - Bel Paese White</description>
      </rowResult>
      <rowResult><!-- row: 2 -->
        <item_id>316882</item_id>
        <description>Beer - Fruli,IPA</description>
      </rowResult>
      <rowResult><!-- row: 3 -->
        <item_id>887875</item_id>
        <description>Marlbourough Sauv Blanc!</description>
      </rowResult>
    </rows>

Sample JSON execution (note: all keys and values are quoted)

    $ sqlclient --config=itemdb.config --sql "SELECT ITEM_ID, DESCRIPTION FROM ITEM LIMIT 3" --format json

    {
        "rows": [
            {
                "item_id": "986461",
                "description": "<!Magnotta> - Bel Paese White"
            },
            {
                "item_id": "316882",
                "description": "Beer - Fruli,IPA"
            },
            {
                "item_id": "887875",
                "description": "Marlbourough Sauv Blanc!"
            }
        ]
    }

Commit message:

README updates changed testconnection from milliseconds to seconds

README.md, after:

# SqlClient - Groovy SQL Client

SqlClient is a database client designed primarily for batch SQL submission.
It is written in Groovy, which compiles to Java, and is compatible with 
vendor-provided Java database drivers.  In particular it works with the 
Denodo JDBC virtual database driver.  It has also been tested with the 
Snowflake JDBC driver and should work with other Java-based database drivers.

It takes input from any one of standard input, command line, or file.
SQL statements normally must be terminated with a semicolon although
for command-line input the semicolon is optional.  In addition to standard
input SqlClient provides an interactive mode with command line editing and 
history leveraging the jline3 library.

Output formats supported are:

    text
    csv
    html
    xml
    json

SqlClient is careful to avoid overwriting any existing files and will abort
in the event of a conflict unless the _append_ option is in effect.

## Command Line Options

**sqlclient [options]**

    -a,--append                 append to output file
    -c,--config <arg>           specify database configuration file
    -d,--database <arg>         specify database name
    -f,--filein <arg>           specify input filename
    -F,--format <arg>           specify format
    -h,--help                   usage information
    -i,--interactive            run in interactive mode
    -n,--node <arg>             specify database node
    -o,--fileout <arg>          specify output filename
    -p,--password <arg>         specify database password
    -s,--scheme <arg>           specify database scheme
    -S,--sql <arg>              specify SQL statement
    -t,--timestamps             timestamp output
    -T,--testconnect <arg>      run connection test
    -u,--user <arg>             specify database username
    -v,--verbose <arg>          specify verbose level
    -w,--width <arg>            limit text column width

## Usage

SqlClient reads SQL, submits it to a connected database, and formats the results
in one of the output formats selected.  

The SQL input can come from a disk file, the command line through the `--sql` option, 
or from standard input (keyboard or pipe).

In addition to standard input, SqlClient also supports an interactive line editing 
mode with retained history.  History is kept in `$HOME/.sqlclient_history`.

SqlClient also supports a control record capability.  Control records allow 
directives to be processed during the SQL processing.  

Directives supported are:

    .format <type>
    .output <filename>
    .append <true/false>
    .width <max text column width>

SqlClient supports various verbose levels as well as a timestamp option
for runtime feedback.

## Verbose levels

    level 0 - no messages (except data of course) 
    level 1 - basic messages (open/close)
    level 2 - enhanced messages (adds version info, open/close success, query audit)
    level 3 - debug messages (adds input trace, text format field adjustments)
    level 4 - debug messages (adds system.properties display)

## Config file format

Config files are optional files containing all the database connection parameters.
They are written in TOML format and support the following parameters:

    dbUser      - the database username
    dbPassword  - the database password
    dbScheme    - the JDBC scheme (vdb::Denodo, snowflake::Snowflake)
    dbHost      - the TCP network address (hostname:port)
    dbName      - the database name
    dbClass     - the database driver class name (optional, defaults based on dbScheme) 
                    vdb defaults to com.denodo.vdp.jdbc.Driver
                    snowflake defaults to net.snowflake.client.jdbc.SnowflakeDriver 

## Test Connection Capability

Additionally, SqlClient has a connection testing capability. With the `--testconnect <arg>` 
option SqlClient will open a database connection, submit a simple query, read the results,
discard the results, and close the connection a requested number of times, pausing between
each connection for a requested interval. The `--testconnect` argument is of the form 'N@M' 
where N represents the number of connection iterations and M represents the wait interval 
between connections measured in seconds. If the interval is not specified it defaults
to 1 second.  This feature is sometimes useful in diagnosing/investigating intermittent
database connectivity issues.

## Examples

**File itemdb.config**

    dbUser = "appuser"
    dbPassword = "appword"
    dbScheme = "vdb"
    dbHost = "dbhost.mydomain.com:9999"
    dbName = "itemdb"
    dbClass = "com.denodo.vdp.jdbc.Driver"

Specifying the dbClass in the config file is optional.  SqlClient uses a default dbClass based on the vdb option
but if a dbClass is provided then it will override the default.

**File item-extract.sql:**

    .format json
    .output ../extract/items.json
    .append true
    SELECT * FROM ITEM;

**Executing item-extract.sql**

`sqlclient --config=itemdb.config --filein=item-extract.sql`

**Executing a SQL statement**

`sqlclient --config=itemdb.config --sql "SELECT * FROM ITEM"`

`echo "SELECT * FROM ITEM" | sqlclient --config=itemdb.config`

Either of these examples will run the query and send the output to the screen.

**File txn_audit.sql**

    select
      100                           -- unnamed integer field
    , 200 as "named field 1"        -- field name longer than field width
    , audit_dt as "audit date"      -- date/time field with named field with space
    , audit_reason                  -- standard varchar field
    , item_id                       -- short varchar field (6)
    , price                         -- double
    
    from
        txn_audit
    join
        txn
    on
        txn.txn_id = txn_audit.txn_id
    ;

Executing txn_audit.sql to produce txn_audit.xml in XML format (shown using short option and without `--config` option)

`sqlclient -s vdb -n dbhost.mydomain.com:9999 -d itemdb -u appuser -p appword -f txn_audit.sql -o txn_audit.xml -F xml`

### Sample executions

Sample text execution

    $ sqlclient --config=itemdb.config --sql "SELECT ITEM_ID, DESCRIPTION FROM ITEM LIMIT 3"
    
    item_id     description
    ----------- ------------------------------
         986461 <!Magnotta> - Bel Paese White
         316882 Beer - Fruli,IPA
         887875 Marlbourough Sauv Blanc!

Sample CSV execution (note quoting)

    $ sqlclient --config=itemdb.config --sql "SELECT ITEM_ID, DESCRIPTION FROM ITEM LIMIT 3" --format csv

    item_id,description
    986461,<!Magnotta> - Bel Paese White
    316882,"Beer - Fruli,IPA"
    887875,Marlbourough Sauv Blanc!

Sample HTML execution

    $ sqlclient --config=itemdb.config --sql "SELECT ITEM_ID, DESCRIPTION FROM ITEM LIMIT 3" --format html

    <table>
      <thead>
        <tr>
          <th>item_id</th>
          <th>description</th>
        </tr>
      </thead>
      <tbody>
        <tr>
          <td>986461</td>
          <td>&lt;!Magnotta&gt; - Bel Paese White</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
          <td>316882</td>
          <td>Beer - Fruli,IPA</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
          <td>887875</td>
          <td>Marlbourough Sauv Blanc!</td>
        </tr>
      </tbody>
    </table>

Sample XML execution

    $ sqlclient --config=itemdb.config --sql "SELECT ITEM_ID, DESCRIPTION FROM ITEM LIMIT 3" --format xml

    <rows>
      <rowResult><!-- row: 1 -->
        <item_id>986461</item_id>
        <description>&lt;!Magnotta&gt; - Bel Paese White</description>
      </rowResult>
      <rowResult><!-- row: 2 -->
        <item_id>316882</item_id>
        <description>Beer - Fruli,IPA</description>
      </rowResult>
      <rowResult><!-- row: 3 -->
        <item_id>887875</item_id>
        <description>Marlbourough Sauv Blanc!</description>
      </rowResult>
    </rows>

Sample JSON execution (note: all keys and values are quoted)

    $ sqlclient --config=itemdb.config --sql "SELECT ITEM_ID, DESCRIPTION FROM ITEM LIMIT 3" --format json

    {
        "rows": [
            {
                "item_id": "986461",
                "description": "<!Magnotta> - Bel Paese White"
            },
            {
                "item_id": "316882",
                "description": "Beer - Fruli,IPA"
            },
            {
                "item_id": "887875",
                "description": "Marlbourough Sauv Blanc!"
            }
        ]
    }
